---
layout: post
title: Does data exist in nature?
date: 2024-12-12
summary: Thinking about what the hell it is we're doing.
---

Businesses are first-class citizens of western societies today. They even have corporate personhood. Keith Hart and David Graeber each have interesting thoughts on this. They shape our societies, similar to how cars have shaped how we design our cities, often to the detriment of pedestrians.

We even expect quite conscious behaviour from corporations. We expect them to be consistent and not contradict themselves. We expect them to read the room, and be conscious of their own image - just as we do humans. This is fair - we should be designing pro-human systems.

Humanity has somewhat arbitrarily defined what is and isn't an organism. Apparently biologists argue a lot about what is and isn't a bee, or a mollusc. We have decades of effort spent on deciding which box we as a species (what's a species?) decide to put a particular bundle of cells.

At every scale of life, constituents interact, pass messages, battle, reproduce, die off. This happens in cell cultures, gut biomes, immune systems, organs, communities, ecosystems, planets. At whatever scale, the picture of life is similar.

>"cars are little blood cells, we are oxygen. City is the airways, suburbs appendages"

David's point on corporate personhood is very interesting to me, because it sparks the idea that corporations may as well be living things in the spirit of the term. Immensely powerful living things, often having more presence in global psyche - and indeed more headcount - than entire nations.

In Keith Hart's book, he talks about the predicament of the modern worker having to borrow the hitman's "it's just business" to justify what they do to earn money; as if what the worker is doing breaks the human contract - is inhuman. This is because it is inhuman. The human is acting on behalf of something inhuman - a larger organism that it is a constituent of. In other words - it is "just" business indeed.

So. Why is it that companies trip over themselves, operate obscenely inefficiently, create human-hostile bureaucratic experiences, and all the other hallmarks of dystopia that have us feeling worried about the future? Why have we created alien beings with inhuman interests?

I divide this predicament into two sub-problems.

The first is a glaring and well documented issue with these massive corporations: myopic incentive structures that are misaligned with humanity's best interests. That is, corporations typically operate to maximise shareholder value and that's the end of it. I have opinions about this, but there are others much better equipped than I to explore this problem.
<!-- 
However, even industries with heavy regulation and incentive structures operate with inefficiencies that mean they concede incentive payments. Conversely, the most villainous corporations could stand to gain more if they could stop tripping over themselves. -->

The second, and I believe least-appreciated part of this predicament is that these pseudo-organisms simply don't have the faculties to operate in a manner that we can reason with as human beings - even when acting in self interest. We are corralled into the happy path that the UX designers have built for us. I believe that in producing corporate superpowers, we have created organisms without the mental capacity to operate effectively to the standards we expect; in a human-friendly way. However, The weakest link in all of their processing is always a human having a slow day or not being told the right thing.

We've made significant ground in improving the consciousness of corporations by creating software that can automate a lot of the menial work that no human would have the attention span to do. However, this software is also limited by human capability. Even the most capable software engineers cannot produce software that handles every edge case. Software is necessarily a simplification of real tasks in order to effectively batch-process things that need to be done at scale. The resultant automations - no matter how cerebral and abstract - have a shelf life. Eventually an instance occurs that the well-meaning software engineer didn't think of.

A component of almost every piece of software is a database. These are usually relational databases with schemas that are very difficult to change. For the purposes of this argument, databases are essentially a massive filing cabinet or clipboard. ORMs (Object Relational Mappers) are pieces of software used to map database records to in-memory objects for processing. Abstractions in application code are hard enough to refactor as it is, but the abstraction needs to change throughout ORMs, middleware and database schemas. In short, changing what an organisation believes "a thing" to be requires ridiculous amounts of effort - at worst an entire redesign of the surrounding system. Some of our best and brightest spend their entire careers maintaining, extending and redesigning these immensely complex systems. They also expect handsome remuneration for their work.

The role of the engineer has become to resolve an organisations idea of the objects in its environment and design circuitry that connects these objects to organisational behaviour (usually with humans in the loop).

Consider that somewhere out in the ether is a figure that represents the proportion of global salary that goes to people who write code. Consider also that mistakes happen in this field.

My point is - we are throwing more and more of our resources, including the cream of our youth, into ~~financial~~ technical activities ~~remote from~~ tangential to the production of goods and services, into activities that generate high private rewards disproportionate to their social productivity.

For organisations to function in our best interests at the scale and breadth we require to continue our journey as a species, we cannot rely on a cottage industry of human engineers to impose, install and uproot fragile concepts of their own design. No human has the ability to design enduring automations that globally optimise the behaviour of these organisational entities in an environment wherein requirements are constantly changing.

# Does data exist in nature?
I think this question gets at the core of the problem.

Until recently, most systems existing on earth - naturally occurring systems - looked something like this:

sensory information -> neural system -> behaviour

There were no databases. Memory was some property of the neural system.
<!-- life was good -->

At some point, some creatures developed the tendency to leave things in their environment to externalise their memory. Cave paintings, tallies, etc. Let's call the act of using the environment for memory "clipboards"

<!-- It's important to remember that this could be considered machinery designed by the creature, and equally a learned messaging functionality of the wider ecosystem.  -->

sensory information -> neural system -> behaviour
                        |       ^   
                        v       |
                        clipboards

Clipboards have been used to great effect. Keep track of crops, transactions - double-entry accounting, etc. 

<!-- The most impactful culmination of this was probably the invention of the printing press, which has allowed humans to compress and share learned experience such that the ceiling of knowledge we can reach in our lifetimes has been signficantly lifted. -->

Clipboards, however useful, require management. You need to recall why you wrote down what you wrote down. You need to record enough detail about what you've written down that it can transcend your own recollection. You need to add entire columns of data to the clipboard as your requirements change - including backpopulating old records. You need to explain to other users of the clipboard how it works, and handle cases where they misunderstand what you meant by what you wrote down.

Clipboards are essentially the most simplified machine intelligence imaginable. They're very suitable for low-complexity businesses like market stalls, etc. For modern global companies - banks, utilities, insurers and even big tech companies, managing clipboards has become an enormous outlay.

Organic neural systems have a lot of advantages over clipboards. Their understanding of concepts of the type rendered down to clipboards is more flexible, and updates regularly as more information is learned. They can also completely one-eighty; effortlessly. Their internal messaging is hugely efficient compared to that of an organisation - abstract concepts do not need to be compressed down to spoken or written language.

However, they cannot efficiently remember thousands of records. They can make quite complex, high-dimensional optimisations, but not crazy amounts. 

# The point

Organisations have communities of humans as their thinking engines, and cottage industries of their humans reconciling their clipboards. Neural nets are capable enough (or will be in due course) that we can at least partially replace organisational thinking engines and eliminate a lot of clipboard management, because abstractions of elements of the operating environment can be learned and constantly updated.
<!-- try not to make big claims like the above, because you're not, you're just suggesting a pattern -->

**All of the spicy stuff happens in the net.**

Coherent and efficient behaviour can come from large organisations if we offload more (but not necessarily all) of their thinking to artificial neural nets. 

from (current):
                        ANN (1%) +
sensory information ->  humans (19%)-> behaviour
                        |       ^   
                        v       |
                        clipboards (80%)

to:
`
sensory information -> neural system (90%) -> behaviour
                        |       ^   
                        v       |
                        clipboards (10%)
`

or even, full biomimicry:

sensory information -> neural system -> behaviour

This migration is looking increasingly feasible as ANN based technologies improve.

<!-- However, I'm concerned that a lot of technologists are getting the wrong idea. **We will not approach this state by plugging foundation models into legacy, clipboard-type systems.**. We need to replace large chunks of organisations with self regulating neural systems. This will mean eliminating a lot of our jobs. This is a good thing. You do not want a job where you have to reconcile records in two separate source systems. -->

Clipboards might still be necessary for scaled, batchy operations. Even as humans, when doing repetitive tasks, we set ourselves up with little production lines to get stuff done quickly - folding laundry, etc. However, it may be that ANNs become so capable that even with their flexible understanding of the world, they can remember a million things as well as having high dimensional understanding of each thing. Another pattern is that they might learn, within the net, to spin up lower-dimensional processes or activate weights that have a shorter path to logits to batch things that need to scale.

The pattern I expect to see will be something like this:
write-only message bus ->   live-trained neural system -> behaviour
                            |                       ^
                            v                       |
                            RAG on message bus records

Data sources can be onboarded to the message bus. Tools can be provided to the behaviour layer such as API calls, web searches, messages to management and interactions with other software. This could be seen as plugging in to legacy systems

# In summary
- Relational databases are evil(?), and we should run our corporations on abstract schemas and vibes, because that's how humans work
    - (I'm only partially joking)
- being a row in a database is unnecessary subjugation and creates dystopian interactions where our unique human experience needs to be sliced up to fit in a signup form
- Machine intelligence could be the antidote to, rather than the accelerator of, dystopic experiences
    - It at least crystallises organisations to what they are so we can more firmly address them, incentivise and punish them
    - It could eliminate or greatly reduce bureaucracies
    - Digital products and services could be things we seamlessly and painlessly interact with as we do with human marketplaces
    - organisations could be more firmly regulated by governments? They could be trained to (and be able to afford to) spend more time on edge-case humans
- All the magic happens in the neural net - we expect complex, flexible handling of situations, and nets are good at this
    - RDBMSs, docstores and graphs all have rigid enough schemas, rather than high-dimensional, learned understandings
    - Nature and time is the best engineer, and will create better understandings of the environment than human-designed abstractions

# TODO
- ~~look into "does data exist in nature?" question~~
    - timely and relevant signals from nervous system vs. tables of decade-old "data" that nobody has any context for
- ~~introduce "minds and clipboards" idea~~
    - uhhh currently i complain about database management overheads, begin a wanky tirade on clipboards, and then make the same complaint about clipboard management overheads
    - need to introduce the comparison between neural systems and low-dimensional clipboard type systems somewhere else, so we can condense everything down a bit
- talk about why current approaches are faster horses
- ~~reconciling systems is a bullshit job~~
- How does the new neural pattern handle state? It just... does?
    - Does it go back through the messagebus via RAG and assemble records to submit to it's own training bus as a "realisation"?
- "but if we have neural nets generate stuff that humans used to generate, they'll be fallible!"
    - humans are fallible
    - RBDMSs have downtime, nulls, dependency management
    - we forgive "honest mistakes" from humans, and will need to learn to forgive these mistakes from systems we've designed to serve us.
- death of aristocracy of software engineers - there will no longer be craftspersons, we need mass produced, shitty software. Like scribes and printing, music production, "content creation" - the demand is too great, the people need access; artisans will be elevated to luxury items only.

