---
layout: post
title: It's Okay If You Don't Love It Anymore
date: 2026-04-25
---

In the world of tech, there is a unique flavour of "work hard" philosophy. Productivity videos are a thing. 9-9-6 is a thing, or so I hear. Programming as a discipline rewards obsessive behaviour. The nature of the work conducted in this field naturally selects for people on the spectrum, people that are asocial, masochists, obsessive compulsives, etc. People that need support, but are instead exploited.

There are some very commonplace philosophies in tech culture that have emerged. The idea that you work hard, obsess over some concept, and then eventually reach some sort of glorious vindication is stitched into our collective psyche. It's implicit in all of our thinking; our primordial father - the idea that the means will be justified.

We accept and even embrace this self-flagellation. The idea that you can carve off some part of your humanity and be handsomely rewarded is romanticised.

I am writing today to tell you that this work and the culture that arise from it are bad for our health. This is a mental illness.

The way I justified my work here was that somehow I wanted to be able to provide a good life for my future family. I wanted to have a house *and* have the time to give my kids a healthy upbringing. Importantly I wanted this provision to originate from value that I myself had created for the world. I recognise the narcissism in that.

This is an intrinsic human desire and, I'd like to highlight, a key component of masculine self-actualisation, especially for those engineering-inclined. However, the opportunity to provide value to the world such that you can have this actualisation is a privilege afforded to a lucky few. The rest of us will work our whole lives without having much to show for it. This is not unlike the world of research, wherein most investigations lead nowhere.

The world has changed since these desires were wired in to us. To buy a home is a massive undertaking, and to buy a home and have enough time between parents to nurture children is even more difficult. The exact cause and nature of this predicament can be better described by other people, but what I'd like to highlight here is that we need to see this tide, the widening of the gap, as a force of nature, an organic power-that-be - see it like gravity, or entropy. Like any other natural force, we need to accept it.

The blokes of the world - my world at least - have had an identity crisis since this became reality and we have reacted poorly. Our identity as producers and providers has been taken away us. Startup culture and high-risk business are our means of imagining we can fight it, our gnashing of teeth, our _rage, rage_. We need to find our identity and our place in the world as more than just providers. We can explore. We can have fun.

<!-- # hate this bit, make less melodramatic and linkedinny -->
What does acceptance of this predicament mean? For me, it means rejecting meaningless work that suggests it will provide fulfilment in exchange for your humanity. It means that being part of a small history is better than not being part of any history. It means finding smaller exchanges of real value - not speculative value. It means - a common theme for me - a return to the physical world, to immediacy, nature and to human interaction. It does not mean going gentle into that good night - it means replacing _rage, rage_ with calm.

> 
"You're one of the luckiest guys in the world, Sam. You could have been digging ditches all these years.

>
That's true. And if I had, at least there'd be some holes in the ground to show for it."

I have made the - quite frankly, straightforward - decision to step away from the working world for the immediate future. I'll be taking on the PCT in July and seeing what's next after that. London, you have been an absolute meat grinder. Fuck you. I love you.

Ka kite anō,

Dan xx

<!-- 
---

It does not have to be this way. I believe a healthy human being requires different environments to what this industry provides.

We need:
- Immediacy - outcomes from our work that provide immediately physical benefit, not just progress towards some abstract goal
- Community
- Emotional Support - nonexistent and even seen as weakness in tech
- Purpose
- Physical Exercise
- Fun

There is a pride in knowledge work that I think makes us look down on ways of living that provide these benefits. We ought to be looking up.




*For me, most code I've written or systems I've designed have been thrown out soon after completion simply because shit happens. In my first job I designed a weatherproof control panel for a fuel system somewhere in the Australian outback that few human beings would ever lay eyes on. I think that actually may still be standing!

**
the great mass of papers lead lives of quiet deprecation. **


**
I look around Old St in London and well, I don't see much. I don't see much because everyone's inside. Lonely people, obsessive people. People who didn't quite fit in at school, or matured late and - lacking the support needed to socialise - they logged on. They write code during the day, get Deliveroo or Simmer meals, and retreat into streaming services in the evenings. They close themselves off from humanity.

 -->
